% Template for Cogsci submission with R Markdown

% Stuff changed from original Markdown PLOS Template
\documentclass[10pt, letterpaper]{article}

\usepackage{cogsci}
\usepackage{pslatex}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{caption}

% amsmath package, useful for mathematical formulas
\usepackage{amsmath}

% amssymb package, useful for mathematical symbols
\usepackage{amssymb}

% hyperref package, useful for hyperlinks
\usepackage{hyperref}

% graphicx package, useful for including eps and pdf graphics
% include graphics with the command \includegraphics
\usepackage{graphicx}

% Sweave(-like)
\usepackage{fancyvrb}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Sinput}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Soutput}{Verbatim}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Scode}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\newenvironment{Schunk}{}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Code}{Verbatim}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{CodeInput}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{CodeOutput}{Verbatim}{}
\newenvironment{CodeChunk}{}{}

% cite package, to clean up citations in the main text. Do not remove.
\usepackage{apacite}

% KM added 1/4/18 to allow control of blind submission


\usepackage{color}

% Use doublespacing - comment out for single spacing
%\usepackage{setspace}
%\doublespacing


% % Text layout
% \topmargin 0.0cm
% \oddsidemargin 0.5cm
% \evensidemargin 0.5cm
% \textwidth 16cm
% \textheight 21cm

\title{How to Make a Proceedings Paper Submission}


\author{{\large \bf Morton Ann Gernsbacher (MAG@Macc.Wisc.Edu)} \\ Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street \\ Madison, WI 53706 USA \AND {\large \bf Sharon J.~Derry (SDJ@Macc.Wisc.Edu)} \\ Department of Educational Psychology, 1025 W. Johnson Street \\ Madison, WI 53706 USA}

\newlength{\cslhangindent}
\setlength{\cslhangindent}{1.5em}
\newenvironment{CSLReferences}%
  {}%
  {\par}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
Include no author information in the initial submission, to facilitate
blind review. The abstract should be one paragraph, indented 1/8 inch on
both sides, in 9\textasciitilde point font with single spacing. The
heading `Abstract' should be 10\textasciitilde point, bold, centered,
with one line of space below it. This one-paragraph abstract section is
required only for standard six page proceedings papers. Following the
abstract should be a blank line, followed by the header `Keywords' and a
list of descriptive keywords separated by semicolons, all in
9\textasciitilde point font, as shown below.

\textbf{Keywords:}
Add your choice of indexing terms or keywords; kindly use a semi-colon;
between each term.
\end{abstract}

Habituation and dishabituation are fundamental processes in learning and
cognition. Habituation refers to the decrease in response to a repeated
stimulus, while dishabituation describes the renewed increase in
response following the introduction of a novel stimulus. These processes
are essential for learning from experience and have been widely
documented across a broad range of species (Rankin et al., 2009;
Thompson, 2009). From single-cell organisms (e.g., Boisseau, Vogel, \&
Dussutour, 2016; Dussutour, 2021; Ginsburg \& Jablonka, 2009) to humans
{[}e.g. Colombo \& Mitchell (2009); Jeffrey \& Cohen (1971); Sokolov
(1990);{]}, habituation and dishabituation enable individuals to filter
out repetitive, non-informative stimuli while remaining sensitive to
novel or meaningful changes. These mechanisms have become a cornerstone
of research methods in cognitive development (Aslin, 2007; Cohen, 2004;
Kucharskỳ, Zaharieva, Raijmakers, \& Visser, 2024; Oakes, 2010).

A typical infant study utilizing the habituation paradigm involves
repeatedly presenting an infant with the same stimulus until they
exhibit a decline in interest, often measured by a progressive decrease
in looking time. Once habituation is established (e.g., looking time in
the final trials must drop to 50\% of initial looking), the infant is
presented with two stimuli: one familiar (previously shown) and one
novel. A dishabituation response---indicated by significantly longer
looking time at the novel stimulus---suggests that the infant can
discriminate between the two. Dishabituation magnitude serves as a
crucial index of attentional recovery and sensitivity to novel stimuli.
As a result, this method -- inducing habituation response and testing
dishabituation -- has been extensively used to investigate infants'
perceptual and cognitive development, providing valuable insights into
early learning mechanisms.

How do individual differences in habituation and dishabituation reflect
underlying cognitive mechanisms and developmental change? Extensive
research has explored their variability and predictive value for later
cognitive development. In general, findings suggest that the rate of
habituation---how quickly an infant's attention declines in response to
repeated exposure to a stimulus---is associated with foundational
cognitive processes such as information processing speed (Hunter \&
Ames, 1988; Poli et al., 2024). Infants who habituate more quickly tend
to show higher IQ scores, better language acquisition, and stronger
executive function abilities in later childhood (Colombo, Shaddy,
Richman, Maikranz, \& Blaga, 2004; Kavšek, 2004; Slater, 1997).
Similarly, individual differences in dishabituation---the extent to
which an infant's attention recovers when presented with a novel
stimulus---are often interpreted as indicators of memory strength.
Greater dishabituation responses have been associated with stronger
recognition memory (Fagan III, 1984; Fagan \& Singer, 1983). These
results highlight the importance of individual variability in early
attentional processes. Measures of habituation and dishabituation can
serve as early cognitive markers with long-term implications.

Prior work also underscores how factors such as age and stimulus
complexity shape habituation and dishabituation (Colombo et al., 2004;
Hunter \& Ames, 1988). According to the influential Hunter \& Ames
(1988) model, the more an infant has been exposed to a stimulus, the
less novel information remains to be processed, leading to a decline in
attention. However, the more complex a stimulus is, the greater the
amount of information available to be learned, leading to prolonged
engagement. Additionally, older infants are assumed to process
information more efficiently than younger infants, allowing them to
habituate more quickly. This framework provides a valuable qualitative
account of how developmental and stimulus-related factors interact to
shape attentional dynamics. Nevertheless, its predictions remain largely
qualitative rather than quantitative and have not been systematically
tested (cf. Bergmann \& Cristia, 2016; Hunter, Ames, \& Koopman, 1983;
Kosie et al., 2024).

Understanding how individual differences in habituation and
dishabituation interact with these factors is crucial for developing a
comprehensive model of early learning. Individuals who habituate more
quickly may process information more efficiently, allowing them to
detect and respond to novel stimuli more effectively, resulting in
greater dishabituation. Alternatively, faster habituation could reflect
a general tendency to disengage from visual stimuli more rapidly,
leading to weaker attentional recovery when a new stimulus appears.
Another important factor that may influence dishabituation is
volatility---the degree of variability in looking time across
habituation trials. Behavioral variability has often been interpreted as
random noise (Faisal, Selen, \& Wolpert, 2008; Renart \& Machens, 2014)
or a lack of control (Todorov, 2004). However, variability can also be
adaptive, reflecting sensitivity to environmental contingencies and
dynamic attention regulation (Aston-Jones \& Cohen, 2005; Wu, Miyamoto,
Castro, Ölveczky, \& Smith, 2014). In the context of habituation and
dishabituation, higher volatility in looking time may indicate greater
flexibility in attention allocation, potentially enhancing
dishabituation by allowing infants to remain more responsive to novel
stimuli.

Systematically studying these relationships---especially across
different age groups and stimulus contexts---remains challenging.
Recruiting and testing large infant samples can be highly
resource-intensive (DeBolt, Rhemtulla, \& Oakes, 2020; Oakes, 2017),
making it difficult to capture sufficient variability. Additionally,
habituation outcomes can be influenced by measurement noise and fixed
threshold criteria (Dannemiller, 1984; Kucharskỳ et al., 2024; Thomas \&
Gilmore, 2004), which risk misclassifying infants' true levels of
attention. As a result, genuine variability in cognitive processing may
be obscured by methodological artifacts. To overcome these limitations
and capture more reliable estimates of individual differences,
researchers have increasingly adopted large-scale data approaches such
as meta-analysis and mega-analysis (Bergmann et al., 2018; Koile \&
Cristia, 2021), as well as online studies, which facilitate the
recruitment of large and diverse participant samples (Chuey et al.,
2021; Chuey, Boyce, Cao, \& Frank, 2024; Sheskin et al., 2020).

In this study, we use large-scale datasets from online studies and
mega-analysis to explore how individual differences in habituation rate
predict dishabituation magnitude. Unlike previous work focused solely on
infancy (Gilmore \& Thomas, 2002; Šimkovic \& Träuble, 2021; cf Cao,
Raz, Saxe, \& Frank, 2023; Raz, Cao, Saxe, \& Frank, 2025), here we take
a lifespan approach, examining habituation and dishabituation from
infancy to adulthood. In addition, we also explored how dishabituation
was shaped by factors like habituation volatility (e.g., fluctuations in
looking time), age, and stimulus complexity shape dishabituation. By
comparing across three age groups, we provide new insights into
developmental continuity and discontinuity. To preview our findings, we
found (1) Individuals who habituate faster show a stronger rebound in
attention to novel stimuli; (2) In adults, but not younger participants,
greater variability in looking time during habituation is associated
with stronger dishabituation, and (3) Different operationalizations of
dishabituation yield somewhat divergent results.

\hypertarget{methods}{%
\section{Methods}\label{methods}}

\hypertarget{datatasets}{%
\subsection{Datatasets}\label{datatasets}}

We used three datasets, each measuring habituation and dishabituation in
adults (Cao et al., 2023), preschoolers (Raz, Cao, Bui, Frank, \& Saxe,
2023), and infants (Kunin, Piccolo, Saxe, \& Liu, 2024).

\hypertarget{adults}{%
\paragraph{Adults}\label{adults}}

The adult dataset was collected using a web-based, self-paced looking
time paradigm. In this experiment, participants were presented with a
sequence of animated creatures and could advance to the next trial at
their own pace by pressing the down arrow key. Each block consisted of
six trials, with one repeating stimulus and one deviant stimulus. The
deviant stimulus appeared at either the second, fourth, or sixth trial
of the block. Since the current analysis focuses on habituation
trajectories, we preprocessed the data to ensure that the deviant
stimulus only appeared in the fourth or sixth trial and included only
the first block for each participant to prevent across-block habituation
effects. The final dataset consists of 186 habituation-dishabituation
sequences from 186 English-speaking participants recruited through
Prolific (Age: \(M\) = 28.98 Years, \(SD\) = 9.32 Years; 111 F; 72 M; 2
NA).

\hypertarget{preschoolers}{%
\paragraph{Preschoolers}\label{preschoolers}}

The design of the preschooler study was similar to the adult study, with
the key difference that it was administered in person at a
university-affiliated preschool in the United States using a laptop. We
applied the same preprocessing steps as in the adult dataset to maintain
consistency. The final dataset includes 33 habituation-dishabituation
sequences from 33 participants (Age: \(M\) = 54.5 Months, \(SD\) = 8.35
Months). We note that this dataset is substantially smaller than the two
others, and thus will interpret the results with caution.

\hypertarget{infants}{%
\paragraph{Infants}\label{infants}}

The infant dataset was compiled through a systematic literature review
and meta-analytic approach, drawing from studies that examined infants'
habituation and dishabituation responses in violation-of-expectation
(VOE) paradigms. The dataset includes infant-level data from studies
published after 1985 that tested typically developing infants between 3
and 12 months of age on expectations about physical objects or agents
engaging in intentional actions. A typical paradigm involves two phases:
in the habituation phase, infants are presented with a sequence of
repeating stimulus. In the test phase, infants are presented with a
stimulus that is either perceptually novel but conceptually similar to
the repeating stimulus, or conceptually novel but perceptually similar.
The current analysis focuses on perceptual dishabituation -- that is,
comparing test trials with perceptually novel stimuli to the last
dishabituation trial. To ensure data quality, we excluded participants
with fewer than three habituation trials. The final dataset includes
1986 habituation-dishabituation sequences from 1986 participants (Age:
\(M\) = 224.9 Days, \(SD\) = 96.45 Days; F; M; NA).

\hypertarget{analytic-approach}{%
\subsection{Analytic approach}\label{analytic-approach}}

All analyses were conducted in R using the nlme package (Pinheiro et
al., 2017). All data and analysis scripts can be accessed from XXX.
These analyses were exploratory, but we provided a robustness check in
section Robustness Check

\hypertarget{selecting-exponential-decay-parameters-for-each-age-group.}{%
\paragraph{Selecting exponential decay parameters for each age
group.}\label{selecting-exponential-decay-parameters-for-each-age-group.}}

We follow the conventions of a vast prior literature (Ashmead \& Davis,
1996; Dannemiller, 1984; Sirois \& Mareschal, 2002; Thompson \& Spencer,
1966) and model habituation with an exponential decay. Here, we fit a
nonlinear mixed-effects (NLME) model with an exponential decay function
on each dataset. The function takes the general form of:
\texttt{LT\ \textasciitilde{}\ a\ *\ exp(b\ *\ trial\_number)}. The
parameter a is the intercept, representing initial looking time, and b
is the decay rate, reflecting the speed of habituation (See FIGURE 1 for
schematic illustration of how a and b shapes the habituation
trajectory).

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Random effects on a only -- allows individual variation in initial
  looking time but assumes a shared decay rate across participants.
\item
  Random effects on b only -- allows individual variation in decay rate
  while assuming a common initial looking time across participants.
\item
  Random effects on both a and b -- allows individual variation in both
  parameters (Note: In the model, we explicitly assumed a and b are
  uncorrelated because they are conceptually independent. Moreover, this
  constraint improves statistical parsimony by reducing model
  complexity.)
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{additional-predictors.}{%
\paragraph{Additional predictors.}\label{additional-predictors.}}

In addition to parameters related to exponential decay, we examined
three additional predictors: volatility (how much looking behavior
varied over the course of habituation), stimulus complexity (whether the
stimuli participants saw were relatively simple or complex), and
participant age. Volatility was defined as the standard deviation of the
model residuals across habituation trials for each age group, capturing
the extent to which looking behavior fluctuates over time (Li, Liu,
Hartman, \& Belsky, 2018; Li, Sturge-Apple, Platts, \& Davies, 2023). In
the adult datasets, complexity was explicitly manipulated (throughout
the experiment, participants saw creatures that had more body parts, or
fewer). In the infant dataset, complexity was defined by the domain of
the stimuli (studies involving agents acting on objects were deemed more
complex than studies involving only inanimate objects). The preschooler
dataset did not include complexity information. Participant age was
available for all datasets, and we converted the original units in each
dataset to months to facilitate better comparison. Finally, since the
infant dataset has sufficient variation to estimate initial looking time
for each individual, we include it as a predictor as well.

\hypertarget{selecting-measures-of-dishabituation.}{%
\paragraph{Selecting measures of
dishabituation.}\label{selecting-measures-of-dishabituation.}}

Our main behavior of interest -- recovering attention to a novel
stimulus, after seeing a series of repeated stimuli -- is best captured
as a contrast between looking at the novel stimulus and looking at the
prior (familiar) stimulus, right before the novel stimulus is shown. But
one challenge in selecting a measure of dishabituation is to ensure that
it is de-confounded from individual differences in participants' overall
tendency to look at stimuli. Thus, we took two approaches to measure
this contrast.

The first was a residual-based approach. Residual is the difference
between an observed value and the predicted value from a model. We
calculated the dishabituation magnitude as the following:

\(Dishabituation = r_{dishab} - r_{lasthab}\)

\(r_{dishab}\) was extracted from fitting an intercept-only linear model
on all dishabituation trials:
\texttt{LT\ \textasciitilde{}\ lme(trial\_looking\_time\ \textasciitilde{}\ 1,\ \ random\ =\ \textasciitilde{}\ 1\ \textbar{}\ subject,\ \ data\ =\ dishabituation\_data)}

\(r_{lasthab}\) was extracted from the best-fitting nlme model,
representing how much an individual's looking time on the last
habituation trial deviated from what would be expected given the overall
pattern of decline in attention across trials for all participants.

Taking the difference between the two model residuals ensures that
dishabituation magnitude is measured relative to each individual's
habituation trajectory. In other words, this residual-based approach can
effectively control for baseline differences in overall looking time and
isolate true attentional recovery from unrelated variability.

Second, as a robustness check, we also calculated dishabituation
magnitude as follow:

\(Dishabituation = log(LT_{dishab}) - log(LT_{lasthab})\)

In this supplementary analysis, features of each participant's
habituation trajectory (for all age groups, volatility and decay rate;
for infants, volatility, decay rate, and a) was estimated using only the
habituation trials preceding the last trial to avoid any potential
spurious dependency between the measures of decay rate estimation and
dishabituation.

\hypertarget{relating-predictors-to-dishabituation.}{%
\paragraph{Relating predictors to
dishabituation.}\label{relating-predictors-to-dishabituation.}}

For each age group, we then ran a linear regression model predicting
dishabituation magnitude based on decay rate, age, and volatility (for
all age groups), stimulus complexity (infants and adults), and initial
looking time (in infants).

In this section, we begin by evaluating whether there is sufficient
variability in decay rates to investigate individual differences. We
then examine key predictors of dishabituation magnitude, followed by a
robustness check on our operationalization of this measure.

\hypertarget{exponential-decay-model-selection.}{%
\paragraph{Exponential decay model
selection.}\label{exponential-decay-model-selection.}}

We found sufficient variability in a and b in the infant dataset, and
sufficient variability in b in the adult and preschooler dataset. We
then used these best-fitting models to extract individual decay rates
(b; all age groups) and initial looking time (a; infants only) for each
age group.

\hypertarget{collinearity-between-potential-predictors-of-dishabituation}{%
\paragraph{Collinearity between potential predictors of
dishabituation}\label{collinearity-between-potential-predictors-of-dishabituation}}

Before studying the effects of our predictors on dishabituation, we
measured their relationships to each other. Since some of these
predictors are conceptually related (i.e.~decay rate, volatility, and
age), we examined their correlations to assess potential collinearity
within each dataset (Figure XX). Most correlations were weak, except
that volatility and decay rates showed moderate correlations in adults
and preschoolers (STATS) and strong correlation between initial looking
time and volatility (STATS). However, variance inflation factors (VIFs)
were below standard thresholds for the models in the following section
(STATS; STATS; STATS). This indicates that multicollinearity did not
pose a major concern in our models.

\hypertarget{what-predicts-dishabituation-in-individual-participants}{%
\paragraph{What predicts dishabituation in individual
participants?}\label{what-predicts-dishabituation-in-individual-participants}}

Since the preschooler dataset includes significantly less data (N =
XXX), we will mainly focus interpreting the results on the infants and
adults dataset. First, we found that looking behavior during habituation
predicted dishabituation in both infants and adults. In both infants and
adults datasets, individuals who habituated more quickly to repeated
stimuli also looked longer when a new stimulus appeared (STATS; STATS).
For infants, individuals who looked longer to the first habituated
stimulus (a) also dishabituated more (STATS).

We also found that higher volatility predicts greater dishabituation
magnitude in adults, though there was no relationship in infants (STATS;
STATS). However, the role of complexity and volatility differed: in
adults, individuals who viewed complex (vs simple) stimuli throughout
the study dishabituated more (STATS), while in infants, individuals who
viewed simple stimuli (involving just inanimate objects) dishabituated
more than those who viewed more complex stimuli (involving agents
interacting with objects) (STATS). Last not but least, in infants,
younger age was linked to greater dishabituation (STATS), but there was
no significant relationship in neither adult nor the preschooler dataset
(STATS; STATS). In the preschooler dataset, only decay rate was a
significant predictor, suggesting that preschoolers who habituated
slower showed a larger dishabituation magnitude (STATS). See Table 1 for
a summary of the results.

\hypertarget{robustness-check.}{%
\paragraph{Robustness check.}\label{robustness-check.}}

Next, we repeated our analyses using our alternative measure of
dishabituation (the difference between the dishabituation trial and the
last habituation trial in log seconds). These two measures were
moderately to strongly correlated in our three datasets (adults: STAT;
preschoolers, STAT; infants: STATS). We repeated the same model
selection procedure, dropping data from the last habituation trial to
avoid spurious correlations between the habituation parameters and our
dependent measure, and the same models had the lowest AICs across the
two analyses.

Despite this consistency of which model was selected as the best fitting
model, the specific predictors differed slightly when using the
log-transformed measure (See Table 1). In adults, only complexity
remained a significant predictor of dishabituation magnitude (STATS). In
preschoolers, decay rate was only marginally positively associated with
dishabituation (STATS). (Given the small sample size, this result should
be interpreted with caution.) For infants, the pattern largely mirrored
our main analysis, with decay rate, age, and complexity all negatively
associated with dishabituation magnitude (STATS). The initial looking
time was negatively associated with the dishabituation magnitude
(STATS), whereas in the residual-based method, the estimate was
marginally positive (STATS).

Overall, while key relationships between decay rate, age, and complexity
showed some consistency across both measures, differences in the
sensitivity of the decay rate effects and volatility effects indicate
that these operationalizations of dishabituation magnitude do not always
yield the same patterns of individual differences.

From birth, humans explore and learn about the world through our looking
behaviors, and two canonical behaviors we display are (1) habituation to
repeated stimuli, and (2) recovery of attention to novel stimuli. How do
these behaviors vary across individuals, and what predicts them?
Studying these questions are challenging because of limitations on
measurement precision, and sample size, particularly in infants and
young children. In this work, we leveraged three existing habituation
datasets---from infancy to adulthood---to investigate relationships
between individual differences in participant behaviors (habituation and
dishabituation), demographics (age), and task factors (stimulus
complexity). In particular, we studied the predictors of dishabituation,
or orienting to novel stimuli. Overall, we found that individuals who
habituate faster show a stronger rebound in attention to novel stimuli.
We also observed an interesting relationship between the volatility of
looking time and dishabituation magnitude, evident only in adults.Last
but not least, our findings serve as a cautious note for researchers
that different operationalizations of dishabituation can yield somewhat
divergent results, underscoring the importance of considering how each
metric may capture different underlying processes. Overall, this work
supports longstanding claims that habituation and dishabituation are not
merely passive responses governed primarily by the dynamics and features
of sensory inputs, but also by the endogenous properties of the observer
(Köster, Kayhan, Langeloh, \& Hoehl, 2020; Raz \& Saxe, 2020). Below, we
discuss each of our positive findings and their implications for
developmental research.

Why do infants and adults who habituate more quickly to dishabituate
more to novel stimuli? One possible explanation for this relationship is
that individuals who habituate more quickly may process information more
efficiently, allowing them to disengage from familiar stimuli and
reallocate attention to novel ones more readily. Previous studies have
shown that habituation and dishabituation reflect rational information
gathering, where individuals allocate attention based on the trade-off
between extracting useful information from a stimulus and the
opportunity to explore new stimuli (Cao et al., 2023; Karni, Mattar,
Emberson, \& Daw, 2025; Raz et al., 2025). Under this framework, a
steeper decay rate may indicate faster evidence accumulation, allowing
individuals to determine more quickly when a stimulus is no longer
informative and shift attention to novel inputs. This relationship also
raises an intriguing reinterpretation of prior findings on individual
differences. While substantial research has identified habituation and
dishabituation as distinct measures predictive of later cognitive
development, our findings suggest these measures may, at least in part,
reflect a common underlying process. Specifically, the connection
between fast habituation and strong dishabituation could imply that both
are noisy measures of the same unifactorial construct, such as overall
efficiency in processing and attention allocation. If so, this might
explain why earlier studies have found overlapping correlations with
cognitive outcomes---what appeared to be separate predictors could
instead reflect different facets of the same mechanism.

Why do adults with more variable looking during habituation dishabituate
more strongly than adults with more consistent looking? While prior work
has investigated the relationship between environmental volatility
(i.e.~the unpredictability of the stimuli) and looking behaviors on a
group level, here we are finding that internal behavioral volatility
also predicts looking behavior. In one prior study Poli et al showed
that infants were faster to saccade to visual stimuli when the stream of
stimuli they watched was unpredictable, than when it was predictable.
Together these findings suggest that observers can adapt to
environmental instability, and that observers meaningfully vary in how
unstable their looking behaviors are, even for repeated stimuli. In the
current work, people whose attention fluctuates more, even when viewing
the same stimulus repeatedly, are not necessarily inattentive or
randomly shifting their gaze; rather, they may be more attuned to
potential changes and better prepared to respond when those changes
occur. This interpretation aligns with models of adaptive attention,
where variability in gaze patterns reflects an active strategy to
monitor the environment for new information (Aston-Jones \& Cohen, 2005;
Wu et al., 2014). However, we only observed this relationship in adults.
This might be due to younger participants exhibiting noisier looking
behaviors, making it harder to detect systematic relationships between
volatility and dishabituation.

Our current results and interpretations are constrained by several
limitations. First, the heterogeneity of our data sources may weaken our
developmental conclusions. While the adult and preschooler datasets
share a comparable paradigm, the infant dataset integrates studies with
diverse stimuli and procedures, introducing additional noise that
complicates direct comparisons across ages. Relatedly, our analyses
suggest that different measures of dishabituation may not always capture
identical patterns across populations, highlighting the need for careful
consideration when selecting operationalization. Given that most
developmental studies rely on a single operationalization, our findings
serve as a cautionary note that different operationalizations can shape
observed effects and should be interpreted in the context of their
underlying assumptions. Additionally, an important limitation is that we
do not know whether we are capturing person-level individual
differences, state-level individual differences, or a combination of
both. Measures such as volatility, decay rate, and dishabituation
magnitude may not be stable over time, given prior findings on the low
test-retest reliability of habituation measures (Colombo, Mitchell,
O'Brien, \& Horowitz, 1987; Cristia, Seidl, Singh, \& Houston, 2016;
Hood et al., 1996). At the very least, participants who vary in behavior
across a short span of time---whether due to intrinsic person-level
traits, momentary state-level fluctuations, or an interaction between
the two---demonstrate a stronger dishabituation effect. For future
research, simulation work could provide a more systematic understanding
of how different operationalizations influence observed effects,
clarifying the extent to which methodological choices are sensitive to
noise and error. By modeling different sources of noise---such as
individual fluctuations in attention, measurement error, and trial-level
variability---simulation studies could help determine whether observed
effects are robust or driven by artifacts of the chosen
operationalization.

By analyzing large-scale datasets that span infancy to adulthood, we
demonstrated that individual differences in habituation trajectories, as
well as the chosen metrics of dishabituation, Although methodological
heterogeneity and smaller sample sizes in preschoolers limit our ability
to make direct developmental comparisons, this work provides a strong
basis for future research to understand the developmental changes of
visual attention. Moreover, our findings highlight that fluctuations in
looking behavior should not be dismissed as noise; rather, they could
reflect adaptive strategies that facilitate information gathering. Taken
together, these insights underscore the need to view visual attention as
an active process that contributes to learning across development.

\hypertarget{references}{%
\section{References}\label{references}}

\setlength{\parindent}{-0.1in} 
\setlength{\leftskip}{0.125in}

\noindent

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\begin{CSLReferences}{1}{0}
\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-ashmead1996measuring}{}}%
Ashmead, D. H., \& Davis, D. L. (1996). Measuring habituation in
infants: An approach using regression analysis. \emph{Child
Development}, \emph{67}(6), 2677--2690.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-aslin2007s}{}}%
Aslin, R. N. (2007). What's in a look? \emph{Developmental Science},
\emph{10}(1), 48--53.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-aston2005integrative}{}}%
Aston-Jones, G., \& Cohen, J. D. (2005). An integrative theory of locus
coeruleus-norepinephrine function: Adaptive gain and optimal
performance. \emph{Annu. Rev. Neurosci.}, \emph{28}(1), 403--450.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-bergmann2016development}{}}%
Bergmann, C., \& Cristia, A. (2016). Development of infants'
segmentation of words from native speech: A meta-analytic approach.
\emph{Developmental Science}, \emph{19}(6), 901--917.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-bergmann2018promoting}{}}%
Bergmann, C., Tsuji, S., Piccinini, P. E., Lewis, M. L., Braginsky, M.,
Frank, M. C., \& Cristia, A. (2018). Promoting replicability in
developmental research through meta-analyses: Insights from language
acquisition research. \emph{Child Development}, \emph{89}(6),
1996--2009.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-boisseau2016habituation}{}}%
Boisseau, R. P., Vogel, D., \& Dussutour, A. (2016). Habituation in
non-neural organisms: Evidence from slime moulds. \emph{Proceedings of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences}, \emph{283}(1829), 20160446.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-cao2023habituation}{}}%
Cao, A., Raz, G., Saxe, R., \& Frank, M. C. (2023). Habituation reflects
optimal exploration over noisy perceptual samples. \emph{Topics in
Cognitive Science}, \emph{15}(2), 290--302.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-chuey2021moderated}{}}%
Chuey, A., Asaba, M., Bridgers, S., Carrillo, B., Dietz, G., Garcia, T.,
et al.others. (2021). Moderated online data-collection for developmental
research: Methods and replications. \emph{Frontiers in Psychology},
\emph{12}, 734398.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-chuey2024conducting}{}}%
Chuey, A., Boyce, V., Cao, A., \& Frank, M. C. (2024). Conducting
developmental research online vs. In-person: A meta-analysis. \emph{Open
Mind}, \emph{8}, 795--808.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-cohen2004uses}{}}%
Cohen, L. B. (2004). Uses and misuses of habituation and related
preference paradigms. \emph{Infant and Child Development: An
International Journal of Research and Practice}, \emph{13}(4), 349--352.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-colombo2009infant}{}}%
Colombo, J., \& Mitchell, D. W. (2009). Infant visual habituation.
\emph{Neurobiology of Learning and Memory}, \emph{92}(2), 225--234.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-colombo1987stability}{}}%
Colombo, J., Mitchell, D. W., O'Brien, M., \& Horowitz, F. D. (1987).
The stability of visual habituation during the first year of life.
\emph{Child Development}, 474--487.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-colombo2004developmental}{}}%
Colombo, J., Shaddy, D. J., Richman, W. A., Maikranz, J. M., \& Blaga,
O. M. (2004). The developmental course of habituation in infancy and
preschool outcome. \emph{Infancy}, \emph{5}(1), 1--38.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-cristia2016test}{}}%
Cristia, A., Seidl, A., Singh, L., \& Houston, D. (2016). Test--retest
reliability in infant speech perception tasks. \emph{Infancy},
\emph{21}(5), 648--667.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-dannemiller1984infant}{}}%
Dannemiller, J. L. (1984). Infant habituation criteria: I. A monte carlo
study of the 50\% decrement criterion. \emph{Infant Behavior \&
Development}.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-debolt2020robust}{}}%
DeBolt, M. C., Rhemtulla, M., \& Oakes, L. M. (2020). Robust data and
power in infant research: A case study of the effect of number of
infants and number of trials in visual preference procedures.
\emph{Infancy}, \emph{25}(4), 393--419.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-dussutour2021learning}{}}%
Dussutour, A. (2021). Learning in single cell organisms.
\emph{Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications}, \emph{564},
92--102.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-fagan1984relationship}{}}%
Fagan III, J. F. (1984). The relationship of novelty preferences during
infancy to later intelligence and later recognition memory.
\emph{Intelligence}, \emph{8}(4), 339--346.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-fagan1983infant}{}}%
Fagan, J. F., \& Singer, L. T. (1983). Infant recognition memory as a
measure of intelligence. \emph{Advances in Infancy Research}.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-faisal2008noise}{}}%
Faisal, A. A., Selen, L. P., \& Wolpert, D. M. (2008). Noise in the
nervous system. \emph{Nature Reviews Neuroscience}, \emph{9}(4),
292--303.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-gilmore2002examining}{}}%
Gilmore, R. O., \& Thomas, H. (2002). Examining individual differences
in infants' habituation patterns using objective quantitative
techniques. \emph{Infant Behavior and Development}, \emph{25}(4),
399--412.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-ginsburg2009epigenetic}{}}%
Ginsburg, S., \& Jablonka, E. (2009). Epigenetic learning in non-neural
organisms. \emph{Journal of Biosciences}, \emph{34}, 633--646.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-hood1996habituation}{}}%
Hood, B. M., Murray, L., King, F., Hooper, R., Atkinson, J., \&
Braddick, O. (1996). Habituation changes in early infancy: Longitudinal
measures from birth to 6 months. \emph{Journal of Reproductive and
Infant Psychology}, \emph{14}(3), 177--185.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-hunter1988multifactor}{}}%
Hunter, M. A., \& Ames, E. W. (1988). A multifactor model of infant
preferences for novel and familiar stimuli. \emph{Advances in Infancy
Research}.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-hunter1983development}{}}%
Hunter, M. A., Ames, E. W., \& Koopman, R. (1983). Effects of stimulus
complexity and familiarization time on infant preferences for novel and
familiar stimuli. \emph{Developmental Psychology}, \emph{19}(3), 338.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-jeffrey1971habituation}{}}%
Jeffrey, W. E., \& Cohen, L. B. (1971). Habituation in the human infant.
\emph{Advances in Child Development and Behavior}, \emph{6}, 63--97.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-karni2025rational}{}}%
Karni, G., Mattar, M., Emberson, L., \& Daw, N. D. (2025). A rational
information gathering account of infant habituation. \emph{bioRxiv},
2025--01.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-kavvsek2004predicting}{}}%
Kavšek, M. (2004). Predicting later IQ from infant visual habituation
and dishabituation: A meta-analysis. \emph{Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology}, \emph{25}(3), 369--393.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-koile2021toward}{}}%
Koile, E., \& Cristia, A. (2021). Toward cumulative cognitive science: A
comparison of meta-analysis, mega-analysis, and hybrid approaches.
\emph{Open Mind}, \emph{5}, 154--173.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-kosie2024manybabies}{}}%
Kosie, J. E., Zettersten, M., Abu-Zhaya, R., Amso, D., Babineau, M.,
Baumgartner, H., et al.others. (2024). ManyBabies 5: A large-scale
investigation of the proposed shift from familiarity preference to
novelty preference in infant looking time pre-data collection manuscript
for peer-review the ManyBabies 5 team.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-koster2020making}{}}%
Köster, M., Kayhan, E., Langeloh, M., \& Hoehl, S. (2020). Making sense
of the world: Infant learning from a predictive processing perspective.
\emph{Perspectives on Psychological Science}, \emph{15}(3), 562--571.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-kucharsky2024habituation}{}}%
Kucharskỳ, Š., Zaharieva, M., Raijmakers, M., \& Visser, I. (2024).
Habituation, part II. Rethinking the habituation paradigm. \emph{Infant
and Child Development}, \emph{33}(1), e2383.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-kunin2024perceptual}{}}%
Kunin, L., Piccolo, S. H., Saxe, R., \& Liu, S. (2024). Perceptual and
conceptual novelty independently guide infant looking behaviour: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. \emph{Nature Human Behaviour},
1--15.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-li2018interactive}{}}%
Li, Z., Liu, S., Hartman, S., \& Belsky, J. (2018). Interactive effects
of early-life income harshness and unpredictability on children's
socioemotional and academic functioning in kindergarten and adolescence.
\emph{Developmental Psychology}, \emph{54}(11), 2101.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-li2023testing}{}}%
Li, Z., Sturge-Apple, M. L., Platts, C. R., \& Davies, P. T. (2023).
Testing different sources of environmental unpredictability on
adolescent functioning: Ancestral cue versus statistical learning and
the role of temperament. \emph{Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry}, \emph{64}(3), 437--448.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-oakes2010using}{}}%
Oakes, L. M. (2010). Using habituation of looking time to assess mental
processes in infancy. \emph{Journal of Cognition and Development},
\emph{11}(3), 255--268.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-oakes2017sample}{}}%
Oakes, L. M. (2017). Sample size, statistical power, and false
conclusions in infant looking-time research. \emph{Infancy},
\emph{22}(4), 436--469.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-pinheiro2017package}{}}%
Pinheiro, J., Bates, D., DebRoy, S., Sarkar, D., Heisterkamp, S., Van
Willigen, B., \& Maintainer, R. (2017). Package {``nlme.''} \emph{Linear
and Nonlinear Mixed Effects Models, Version}, \emph{3}(1), 274.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-poli2024individual}{}}%
Poli, F., Ghilardi, T., Beijers, R., Weerth, C. de, Hinne, M., Mars, R.
B., \& Hunnius, S. (2024). Individual differences in processing speed
and curiosity explain infant habituation and dishabituation performance.
\emph{Developmental Science}, \emph{27}(3), e13460.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-rankin2009habituation}{}}%
Rankin, C. H., Abrams, T., Barry, R. J., Bhatnagar, S., Clayton, D. F.,
Colombo, J., et al.others. (2009). Habituation revisited: An updated and
revised description of the behavioral characteristics of habituation.
\emph{Neurobiology of Learning and Memory}, \emph{92}(2), 135--138.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-raz2023no}{}}%
Raz, G., Cao, A., Bui, M. K., Frank, M. C., \& Saxe, R. (2023). No
evidence for familiarity preferences after limited exposure to visual
concepts in preschoolers and infants. In \emph{Proceedings of the annual
meeting of the cognitive science society} (Vol. 45).

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-Raz_2025}{}}%
Raz, G., Cao, A., Saxe, R., \& Frank, M. C. (2025). A
stimulus-computable rational model of habituation in infants and adults.
http://doi.org/\href{https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.102713.1}{10.7554/elife.102713.1}

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-raz2020learning}{}}%
Raz, G., \& Saxe, R. (2020). Learning in infancy is active, endogenously
motivated, and depends on the prefrontal cortices. \emph{Annual Review
of Developmental Psychology}, \emph{2}(1), 247--268.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-renart2014variability}{}}%
Renart, A., \& Machens, C. K. (2014). Variability in neural activity and
behavior. \emph{Current Opinion in Neurobiology}, \emph{25}, 211--220.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-sheskin2020online}{}}%
Sheskin, M., Scott, K., Mills, C. M., Bergelson, E., Bonawitz, E.,
Spelke, E. S., et al.others. (2020). Online developmental science to
foster innovation, access, and impact. \emph{Trends in Cognitive
Sciences}, \emph{24}(9), 675--678.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-vsimkovic2021additive}{}}%
Šimkovic, M., \& Träuble, B. (2021). Additive and multiplicative
probabilistic models of infant looking times. \emph{PeerJ}, \emph{9},
e11771.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-sirois2002models}{}}%
Sirois, S., \& Mareschal, D. (2002). Models of habituation in infancy.
\emph{Trends in Cognitive Sciences}, \emph{6}(7), 293--298.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-slater1997can}{}}%
Slater, A. (1997). Can measures of infant habituation predict later
intellectual ability? \emph{Archives of Disease in Childhood},
\emph{77}(6), 474--476.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-sokolov1990orienting}{}}%
Sokolov, E. (1990). The orienting response, and future directions of its
development. \emph{The Pavlovian Journal of Biological Science},
\emph{25}, 142--150.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-thomas2004habituation}{}}%
Thomas, H., \& Gilmore, R. O. (2004). Habituation assessment in infancy.
\emph{Psychological Methods}, \emph{9}(1), 70.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-thompson2009habituation}{}}%
Thompson, R. F. (2009). Habituation: A history. \emph{Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory}, \emph{92}(2), 127--134.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-thompson1966habituation}{}}%
Thompson, R. F., \& Spencer, W. A. (1966). Habituation: A model
phenomenon for the study of neuronal substrates of behavior.
\emph{Psychological Review}, \emph{73}(1), 16.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-todorov2004optimality}{}}%
Todorov, E. (2004). Optimality principles in sensorimotor control.
\emph{Nature Neuroscience}, \emph{7}(9), 907--915.

\leavevmode\vadjust pre{\hypertarget{ref-wu2014temporal}{}}%
Wu, H. G., Miyamoto, Y. R., Castro, L. N. G., Ölveczky, B. P., \& Smith,
M. A. (2014). Temporal structure of motor variability is dynamically
regulated and predicts motor learning ability. \emph{Nature
Neuroscience}, \emph{17}(2), 312--321.

\end{CSLReferences}

\bibliographystyle{apacite}


\end{document}
